Changing the typefaces on displays reduced the amount of time male drivers looked away from the road by nearly 11% in two experiments, according to a study out Tuesday by researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the New England University Transportation Center. That difference in "glance time" represents about 50 feet in distance when traveling at highway speed, says David Gould of Monotype Imaging, which sponsored the study.
Despite increasing use of voice-activitated controls in car, "We know that text in car is here to stay," says Bryan Reimer, one of the study's authors and a research scientist at MIT's AgeLab, whose studies include the impact of vehicle technologies on driver behavior. "Given this reality, text needs to be as easy to read as possible."
Of the nearly 900,000 crashes involving distracted driving reported to police in 2010, 26,000 involved adjusting devices or controls in a car, says the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. About 3,000 people were killed in distracted driving crashes last year, the agency says.Reimer says cellphone makers need to address font size and type as well, especially now that car can increasingly project smartphone features onto dash displays.
Chevrolet's 2013 Sonic and Spark small car have an app called GoGo that can show smartphones' navigation systems on the car' touchscreens. Starting next year, Mercedes-Benz says it will integrate smartphones -- including those by Nokia, HTC and Samsung -- into the car through the MirrorLink open standard.
NHTSA's proposed guidelines require all dashboard functions to be possible with one or more two-second glances away from the road.
Some luxury automakers are allowing drivers to read snippets of e-mails, texts and social media on dashboard displays. That's raised concerns among some safety experts, although many argue it's safer than when drivers read them on cell phones.
Edmunds.com executive editor Michael Jordan says automakers have been slow to adopt this technology because they are weighing "the issues of distracted driving with a consumer demand for more technology and connectivity in their vehicles."
Carroll Lachnit, Edmunds' consumer advice editor, says "the ability to read content from an e-mail, text or social media channel from behind the wheel is quite worrying."One popular font used in car "conveys power and energy," but is so compact and tightly spaced that some letters are "nearly indistinguishable from each other," says Steve Matteson, a researcher on the study who works for Monotype. Monotype's fonts are used by clients for Ford vehicles, the Kindle and Nook, Garmin navigation systems and the xBox, among other products.
Automakers are addressing this issue, along with all of the other vehicle-driver "interfaces" that can take eyes off the road, says Wade Newton, spokesman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers.